Federal Register, Volume 87 Issue 139 (Thursday, July 21, 2022)
[Federal Register Volume 87, Number 139 (Thursday, July 21, 2022)]
[Notices]
[Page 43494]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov]
[FR Doc No: 2022-15589]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Forest Service


Superior National Forest; Minnesota; Rainy River Withdrawal 
Environmental Assessment

AGENCY: Forest Service, Agriculture (USDA).

ACTION: Notice to extend comment period.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, has 
prepared an environmental assessment to support its application for a 
20-year withdrawal of the Rainy River watershed from disposition of 
Federally owned minerals under United States mineral and geothermal 
leasing laws. The intent of the requested withdrawal is to protect and 
preserve natural and cultural resources in the Rainy River watershed, 
including the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness (BWCAW), Mining 
Protection Area (MPA), and the 1854 Ceded Territory, from the known and 
potential adverse environmental impacts arising from exploration and 
development of Federally owned minerals. This notice is to inform the 
public that the Forest Service is extending the opportunity to comment 
on the environmental assessment by 15 days.

DATES: Comments concerning the environmental assessment must be 
received by Friday, August 12, 2022.

ADDRESSES: The environmental assessment and supporting documents are 
available on the project web page at http://go.usa.gov/xtaCw. 
Electronic comments are preferred through the project website at 
https://go.usa.gov/xuH43. Comments may also be sent electronically to 
[email&#160;protected]. Written comments may be sent to 
Forest Headquarters, 8901 Grand Avenue Place, Duluth, MN 55808.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Matt Judd, Minerals Project Manager, 
at [email&#160;protected] or 218-626-4300.
    Individuals who use telecommunication devices for the deaf and hard 
of hearing (TDD) may call the Federal Relay Service (FRS) at 1-800-877-
8339, 24 hours a day, every day of the year, including holidays.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

Purpose and Need for Action

    The purpose of the requested withdrawal is to protect and preserve 
natural and cultural resources in the Rainy River watershed, including 
the BWCAW, MPA, and the 1854 Ceded Territory, from the known and 
potential adverse environmental impacts arising from exploration and 
development of Federally owned minerals. The withdrawal is needed 
because the Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) have 
seen and can reasonably anticipate increasing interest within the 
private sector for developing the copper-nickel ore minerals in the 
Duluth Complex that may adversely impact the Rainy River watershed.

Proposed Action

    The Secretary of the Interior would issue a public land order, and 
approximately 225,504 acres of National Forest System lands in the 
Rainy River watershed would be withdrawn from disposition under the 
United States mineral and geothermal leasing laws for a 20-year term, 
subject to valid existing rights. The withdrawal would restrict the BLM 
from processing or issuing new hardrock prospecting permits and mineral 
leases on National Forest System lands in the withdrawal boundary. 
However, the withdrawal would not prohibit ongoing or future 
exploration or mining extraction operations on valid existing rights, 
as determined by the BLM.
    The withdrawal would not prohibit activities on non-federal 
(surface and mineral) ownerships. State, county, and private mineral 
interests could continue to exercise their ownership rights. However, 
if fee simple title of these lands and minerals were acquired by the 
United States during the withdrawal period, through means such as 
purchase or exchange to be managed by the Forest Service, such 
acquisitions would be subject to the withdrawal. Partial federal 
mineral interests, where the Federal government owns less than 100 
percent of the mineral estate, would also not be affected by the 
withdrawal. No other management changes would be made affecting access 
to private inholdings, federal mineral material operations (sand, 
gravel, and dimension stone), or management of other forest resources 
such as timber, wildlife, and recreation.

Lead and Cooperating Agencies

    The Forest Service is the lead agency for preparing the 
environmental assessment. The BLM is a cooperating agency for the NEPA 
analysis (40 CFR 1508.1(e)). The BLM will independently evaluate and 
review the analysis and any other documents needed for the Secretary of 
the Interior to make a decision on the requested withdrawal.

Responsible Official

    The Secretary of the Interior is the decision-maker for the 
requested withdrawal.

How To Comment

    Comments may be submitted in electronic (preferred) or hard-copy 
form to the website or addresses provided in the ADDRESSES section of 
this notice. It is important that reviewers provide their comments at 
such times and in such manner that they are useful to the agency's 
preparation of the environmental assessment. Therefore, comments should 
be provided prior to the close of the comment period and should clearly 
articulate the reviewer's concerns and contentions.
    The proposed withdrawal is not subject to Forest Service objection 
procedures at 36 CFR 218 because the decision to be made is by the 
Secretary of the Interior.

    Dated: July 18, 2022.
Deborah Hollen,
Acting Associate Deputy Chief, National Forest System.
[FR Doc. 2022-15589 Filed 7-20-22; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 3411-15-P


