August 4, 2026                      Senator Maria Cantwell
                                    Ranking Member, Senate Commerce
Senator Ted Cruz                    Committee
Chair, Senate Commerce              511 Hart Senate Office Building
Committee                           Washington, D.C. 20510
167 Russell Senate Office Building
Washington, DC 20510

Dear Chairman Cruz, Ranking Member Cantwell, and Members of the Senate Commerce
Committee:

The Center for Democracy & Technology (CDT) commends the Senate Commerce Committee
for its focus on protecting children online in its upcoming markup on August 5, 2026. CDT has
advocated for Congress to adopt strong privacy protections and protect free expression online
for everyone, adults and children alike.

Children today will use online services, from web browsers, to social media, to search engines,
to chatbots, for their entire lives. Enacting comprehensive consumer privacy legislation that
meaningfully realigns consumer expectations and incentives for online business models is the
best path forward to protecting children and everyone online and to addressing root causes of
harms related to minors' activities on social media, generative AI models, and other
internet-enabled services. In the absence of comprehensive protections for everyone, all
stakeholders, including families, companies, civil society, academics, researchers,
technologists, and policy makers, must work together to ensure that young people can grow and
learn to use digital technologies in a safe and age-appropriate fashion, regardless of their race,
gender, socioeconomic status, disability, or familial situation. The committee is right to focus on
this critical topic. Our collective future depends on it.

Three of the bills before the Committee fall short of their intended goals. Moreover, they raise
significant constitutional concerns. Legislation that can never take effect protects no one.

     Kids Online Safety Act (KOSA). Concerns raised by KOSA are well documented. The
         duty of care is likely unconstitutional. The bill incentivizes age verification, which
         endangers privacy and free expression for everyone. And kids in the LGBTQ community,
         disability community, and other marginalized groups will be disproportionately harmed by
         the censorship the bill would encourage. Many parents have made it clear they are
         concerned by this as well.

                                    1401 K Street NW, Suite 200 Washington, DC 20005
     Children's Health, Advancement, Trust, Boundaries, and Oversight in Technology Act or
         "CHATBOT" Act. While a less restrictive option than the GUARD Act, which would raise
         far greater privacy and free expression concerns, the managers' amendment of the
         CHATBOT Act nonetheless raises constitutional concerns by incentivizing age
         verification through a constructive knowledge standard, without sufficient safeguards to
         protect privacy and the ability to access these systems free from undue burdens on
         constitutional rights. Because the bill requires suspension and termination of existing
         accounts the provider "knows" belong to noncompliant minors -- but provides no
         mechanism for misidentified users to contest that determination -- adults could be
         forced to undergo age verification or lose both their accounts and, through the bill's
         deletion mandate, their entire conversation histories. It would require minors under 13 to
         have parent-managed accounts through which parents could monitor the contents of all
         of the child's communications with a chatbot -- effectively requiring providers to retain
         records of children's most private conversations -- endangering kids' privacy and access
         to lawful information. Teens 13­17 could not create accounts without verifiable parental
         consent, and teens whose parents decline to create an optional family account would be
         locked into the most restrictive default settings.

     Shielding Children's Retinas from Egregious Exposure on the Net Act or "SCREEN" Act.
         The SCREEN Act requires covered platforms to verify the ages of their users before
         allowing them to access the platform if the platform hosts any speech that is harmful to
         minors as defined by the bill. The SCREEN Act contains two major flaws. First, the
         SCREEN Act is overly broad. It sweeps in all platforms that might host content that is
         obscene as to minors. This includes major platforms like X and Reddit. Moreover, the bill
         would require those platforms to exclude minors all together, not just from content they
         have no constitutional right to view. After the Supreme Court's decision in FSC v. Paxton,
         bills requiring age assurance to access adult content may be permissible, but they
         should be crafted so as not to censor content children have a constitutional right to
         access. The SCREEN Act fails that test. Second, the SCREEN Act does not require
         sufficient safeguards for the implementation of the age verification processes it
         mandates, risking everyone's privacy and access to constitutionally protected
         expression.

These bills would disempower children and their families, making it more difficult for them to
control their experiences with digital technologies and censoring their access to information in
violation of their constitutional rights. They would also impose significant burdens on everyone's
access to digital technologies by imposing or incentivizing age verification. Before advancing
any of these bills further in the legislative process, the Committee should revise them to address
these concerns.

S. 4199, The Youth AI Privacy Act takes a more appropriate approach. The bill would create
important safeguards for the use of minors' data by generative AI services, including restrictions
on the use of minors' data to train AI systems or to profile them, restrictions on advertising to
minors, and data minimization and use limitations for minors' personal information. These are
important safeguards that CDT supports. We look forward to working with the Committee to
ensure the bill protects minors' privacy and their free expression rights, particularly by further
calibrating the knowledge standard, ensuring it can withstand judicial review, and that minors'
rights to seek information via covered systems are fully protected, as the bill moves forward.

The Committee is right to express concern about how children will be impacted by existing and
emerging technologies. Legislative proposals that would enact meaningful data minimization
restrictions and other data privacy protections either for everyone or, at a minimum, beginning
with enhancing protections for children would help to address some of the root causes
animating the concerns for kids' safety online. We look forward to working with the Committee
members and staff to enact meaningful protections for children and for everyone online. For any
questions, please contact Kate Ruane, Director, CDT Free Expression Project.

Sincerely,

Center for Democracy & Technology
