       SECTION 124—AGENCY OPERATIONS IN THE ABSENCE OF APPROPRIATIONS

SECTION 124—AGENCY OPERATIONS IN THE ABSENCE OF APPROPRIATIONS

                              Table of Contents

124.1  What types of actions may my agency conduct during a lapse in appropriations?
       (a) Background
124.2  (b) Policies
124.3  What plans should my agency make in anticipation of a lapse in appropriations?
124.4  When should my agency's shutdown plans be implemented?
124.5  How may my agency receive lapse communications updates from OMB?
       Am I automatically apportioned obligational authority for agency operations that are
       authorized by law to continue in the absence of appropriations?

                              Summary of Changes

Updates the method of communication agencies will receive from OMB (section 124.4).

124.1 What types of actions may my agency conduct during a lapse in appropriations?

(a) Background.

The Antideficiency Act (ADA) prohibits agencies from incurring obligations in advance of, or in excess of,
an appropriation, except in certain limited circumstances. The Attorney General issued two opinions in the
early 1980s ("Applicability of the Antideficiency Act Upon a Lapse in an Agency's Appropriations" (1980)
and "Authority for the Continuance of Government Functions During a Temporary Lapse in Appropriations"
(1981)) finding that the language and legislative history of the ADA prohibits agency officials from incurring
obligations in the absence of appropriations. The Department of Justice's Office of Legal Counsel issued
another opinion in 1995 ("Government Operations in the Event of a Lapse in Appropriations" (1995))
reaffirming and updating its 1981 opinion.

An agency may still incur an obligation in the absence of an appropriation for certain "excepted" functions,
including when:

      • A statute or court order expressly authorizes or requires an agency to obligate funds in advance of
          appropriations for the subject function;

      • The lawful continuation of funded or unfunded functions necessarily implies that the subject
          function must also continue because suspension of that subject function would prevent or
          significantly damage the execution of the other lawfully continuing functions;

      • The subject function addresses emergency circumstances such that the suspension of the function
          would imminently threaten the safety of human life or the protection of property; or

      • The subject function is necessary to discharge the President's Constitutional duties and powers.

As discussed in section 124.2, an agency may retain employees who otherwise would be subject to furlough
so that those employees may continue to perform "excepted" functions during a lapse in appropriations.

OMB Circular No. A–11 (2025)                      Page 1 of Section 124
SECTION 124—AGENCY OPERATIONS IN THE ABSENCE OF APPROPRIATIONS

Agency functions that are financed with appropriations that have not lapsed may continue and are "exempt"
from any shutdown procedures, even while a lapse has occurred in other appropriations.

(b) Policies.

This section provides policy guidance and instructions for actions to be taken by Executive Branch agencies
when the Congress fails to enact regular appropriations, a continuing resolution, or needed supplemental
appropriations, resulting in a lapse of appropriations.

This section does not apply to specific appropriations action by the Congress to deny program funding.

When the Congress fails to act on program supplementals and the result is partial funding interruptions,
special procedures beyond those outlined in this section may be warranted. In such cases, you should
consult your OMB representative.

Within the guidance established by the opinions issued by the Department of Justice and this Circular,
agency heads, in consultation with their general counsels, must decide what agency activities are excepted
or otherwise legally authorized to continue during a lapse in appropriations. Agencies should address
questions to OMB, including questions about the interpretation of the Antideficiency Act. OMB will
engage with the agency and the Department of Justice's Office of Legal Counsel, as necessary and
appropriate.

124.2 What plans should my agency make in anticipation of a lapse in appropriations?

Agency heads, in consultation with their general counsels, must develop and maintain plans for an orderly
shutdown in the event of a lapse in appropriations. Each agency must have an up-to-date lapse plan on file
with OMB.

Agencies must submit an updated lapse plan to OMB for review, at minimum, every two years, in the odd-
numbered years, on August 1. Plans should be updated in 2025. Agencies must also submit an updated
lapse plan to OMB for review whenever there is a change in the source of funding for an agency program
or any significant modification, expansion, or reduction in agency program activities. Additional guidance
on lapse plan submission and review for each potential lapse will be communicated with agencies, as
needed.

When submitting updated lapse plans for review, agencies must specifically identify any changes made
based on the most recent lapse plan on file with OMB. A document containing tracked changes and/or
annotated comments is required. Plans should be submitted to your OMB examiner and with a copy to the
following email address: Section124Plans@omb.eop.gov. Agencies may also contact this email address
with questions related to their lapse plans.

Once the updated lapse plan is reviewed by OMB, the agency will publish the final lapse plan using a
specified landing page on their agency website.

Below are the requirements for each lapse plan.

Given that the duration of a lapse in appropriations is inherently uncertain, your plan should describe agency
actions to be taken during a short-term lapse (1-5 days). It also should identify anticipated changes if the
lapse extends beyond that time period. Your plan should also designate personnel responsible for
implementing and adjusting the plan to respond to the length of the lapse in appropriations and changes in
external circumstances.

Page 2 of Section 124  OMB Circular No. A–11 (2025)
SECTION 124—AGENCY OPERATIONS IN THE ABSENCE OF APPROPRIATIONS

You must include the following template at the beginning of your plan:

                                        Lapse Plan Summary Overview                # days
Estimated time (to nearest half day) required to complete shutdown activities:

Total number of agency employees expected to be on board before implementation     # employees
of the plan:

Total number of agency employees expected to be furloughed under the plan          # employees
(unduplicated count):

Total number of employees to be retained under the plan for each of the following categories
(may include duplicated counts):

Compensation is financed by a resource other than annual appropriations:           # employees

Necessary to perform activities expressly authorized by law:                       # employees

Necessary to perform activities necessarily implied by law:                        # employees

Necessary to the discharge of the President's constitutional duties and powers:    # employees

Necessary to protect life and property:                                            # employees

Brief summary of significant agency activities that will continue during a lapse:

Brief summary of significant agency activities that will cease during a lapse:

The plan should then proceed to describe in detail, for each component within your agency, the following:

         • To the extent that specific shutdown activities will not be completed within one-half day, specify
               the nature of each such activity, together with the time and the number of employees necessary
               to complete the activity;

         • The total number of employees in the component to be on-board before implementation of the
               plan;

         • The total number of employees in the component expected to be furloughed under the plan;

         • The total number of employees to be retained in the component under the plan for each of the
               categories listed in the table above (i.e., the employees' compensation is financed by carryover
               funds or an appropriation provided by permanent law, they are necessary to perform activities
               expressly authorized by law, they are necessary to perform activities necessarily implied by law,
               they are necessary to the discharge of the President's constitutional duties and powers, or they
               are necessary to protect life and property). If an employee fits in more than one category, they
               may be reflected in the count for all applicable categories (i.e., count may be duplicated), in order
               to ensure the best estimate of the number of employees within each category; and

OMB Circular No. A–11 (2025)                                                       Page 3 of Section 124
SECTION 124—AGENCY OPERATIONS IN THE ABSENCE OF APPROPRIATIONS

       • The agency's legal basis for each of its determinations to retain categories of employees,
             including a description of the nature of the agency activities in which these employees will be
             engaged.

To the extent that any of the information described above is expected to change should a lapse in
appropriations extend for a prolonged period of time (i.e., longer than 5 days), the plan should explicitly
describe these changes. In particular, the plan should indicate any points in time when the furlough status
of employees may change, how many employees would be affected, and the legal basis for such changes.
Agencies should consult with an OMB representative at such points in time during a lapse in appropriations
to make OMB aware of any such changes. In addition, during a lapse in appropriations agencies should
make an OMB representative aware of any instances where actions deviate from what is set forth in the
plan.

Agency plans should also describe the actions that will be necessary to resume orderly operations once
appropriations are restored, including:

       • Methods for notifying employees that the shutdown furlough has ended and that they are to
             return to work on a specified day (normally the employee's next scheduled workday after the
             furlough has ended);

       • Flexibilities available to supervisors if employees have problems returning to work on the day
             specified by the agency, including the use of accrued annual leave, compensatory time off, or
             credit hours;

       • Procedures for resuming program activities, including steps to ensure appropriate oversight and
             disbursement of funds.

At the time employees are given furlough notices, agencies should provide them as much information as
possible regarding how the agency will go about resuming operations after the furlough has ended.

124.3 When should my agency's shutdown plans be implemented?

OMB will monitor the status of congressional actions on appropriations bills and will notify agencies if
shutdown plans are to be implemented. Whenever it appears that a lapse in appropriations might occur,
you should review your shutdown plans, and, if revisions are required, promptly submit the revised plan to
OMB and post the revised plan on your agency website. When agencies submit their plans to OMB, they
should provide OMB with information on the agency personnel that would serve as a point of contact in
the event of a lapse. While agencies are ultimately responsible for preparing and implementing orderly
shutdown plans, all changes to the plans must be submitted to OMB for review in advance of implementing
the plan. See section 124.2.

One week prior to the expiration of appropriations bills, regardless of whether the enactment of
appropriations appears imminent, OMB will communicate with agency senior officials to remind agencies
of their responsibilities to review and update orderly shutdown plans, and will share a draft communication
template to notify employees of the status of appropriations. OMB will hold follow-up communications
on a periodic basis until such time as appropriations are enacted or a lapse in appropriations occurs.
Approximately two business days before a potential lapse in appropriations, in coordination with OMB,
agencies should notify employees of the status of funding using the OMB-provided employee notification.
OMB will notify agencies when they should begin to inform employees of their individual status
(e.g., furloughed or not) under a lapse.

Page 4 of Section 124  OMB Circular No. A–11 (2025)
                                          SECTION 124—AGENCY OPERATIONS IN THE ABSENCE OF APPROPRIATIONS

After OMB has communicated that a lapse in appropriations has occurred, OMB will provide guidance to
agencies directing the initiation of orderly shutdown activities. Each agency head must determine the specific
actions that will be taken; however, all actions must contribute to an orderly shutdown of the agency. All
individual employees should have been notified of their status under a lapse by this time. Agency heads
will notify OMB immediately once shutdown activities are initiated.

During a lapse in appropriations, agencies should only engage in activities consistent with their shutdown
plan.

Agencies must take necessary personnel actions to release employees in accordance with applicable law
and regulations of the Office of Personnel Management. You must prepare employee furlough notices and
process personnel and pay records in connection with shutdown furlough actions. You should plan for
these functions to be performed by employees who are retained for orderly termination of agency activities
as long as those employees are available. Agencies should also establish clear protocols for how employees
will be provided with furlough notices, contacted to be recalled to work following the end of the lapse in
appropriations or should their furlough status change in accordance with their agency's plan, and informed
of pertinent pay and leave information during the lapse. Where appropriate, agencies should seek to utilize
available technology to allow employees maximum flexibility in returning to work.

OMB will notify you once the lapse in appropriations has ended so that you can begin implementing your
plan to orderly resume agency activities.

124.4 How may my agency receive lapse communications updates from OMB?

Executive Branch agencies will receive lapse updates from OMB via email. To receive lapse updates via
email, agency employees must join the group by requesting access through their RMO point of contact.

124.5 Am I automatically apportioned obligational authority for agency operations that are
         authorized by law to continue in the absence of appropriations?

Yes. You are automatically apportioned the amounts necessary to carry out your agency's shutdown plan
as required by this section. This automatic apportionment provides authority to incur obligations, but does
not provide any authority to liquidate such obligations.

This automatic apportionment does not affect previously approved current-year apportionments for non-
continuing resolution (CR) funds, such as multi-year and permanent law appropriations. See sections
120.55 and 123.23 for what happens to apportioned CR funds if the lapse in appropriations follows a CR.

OMB Circular No. A–11 (2025)  Page 5 of Section 124
